well as Israel considers its response to
Iran's attack and continues to fight its
war against tamas in Gaza there are
fears over where these Regional tensions
could head it's a complex part of the
world with many rivals vying for
influence Israel's neighbor Jordan and
Regional heavyweight Saudi Arabia both
appeared to help defend Israel from
Iran's missiles to the surprise of many
that was both countries are involved in
a complicated Balancing Act making it
difficult to predict how they might
behave in the future
when the drones and missiles from Iran
came flying towards Israel many of them
passed through Jordan's airspace not
only did the Arab Kingdom help shoot
them down it also opened its airspace to
Israeli and US planes seeking to
intercept them Aman insists that was
strictly to protect its own citizens but
Jordan's King Abdullah has to balance
competing interests Jordan is pro
Western and likes to keep in step with
its allies especially the United States
plus Jordan shares a long border with
Israel and wants peaceful relations Aman
often Works behind the scenes with the
Israeli
authorities but Israel's war in Gaza has
outraged many jordanians one fifth of
the population is of Palestinian descent
including King abdullah's own wife the
government has viously condemned the war
but the Kingdom's received defense of
Israel in the face of Iranian missiles
has angered
many Jordan's powerful neighbor Saudi
Arabia also faces a difficult Balancing
Act the Sunni Kingdom views Shiite Iran
as its biggest Regional rival but last
year it reestablished relations with
Tran both the Saudis and the United Arab
Emirates have sought to improve ties
with Iran and Israel
prior to Israel's intervention in Gaza
Saudi Crown Prince Muhammad bin Salman
looked poised to sign a deal with the us
where the kingdom might have recognized
Israel in return for security guarantees
from
Washington but after 6 months of war in
Gaza and tens of thousands of
Palestinians dead that's off the table
for now still Arab officials say both
the Saudis and the Emirates shared
intelligence with the Americans warning
that Iran was planning an attack on
Israel that probably allowed for a more
successful defensive response by Israel
and its allies the challenge for Arab
leaders is to keep the US on side while
not endangering their delicate
relationship with Iran or being seen by
their own people as supporting Israel at
the expense of Palestinians in
Gaza and for a closer look we can now
bring in or alawi he's the director of
the alod Center for political studies
and independent Think Tank based in Aman
in Jordan Mr alavi welcome to DW now
Jordan and Saudi Arabia were involved in
thwarting Iran's attack on Israel some
Israeli media are now talking about a
new military alliance against Iran is
that what this
is I don't think so and let us return
back to the year 2021 when Biden first
visit to the region being a president of
the United States he tried to make
Network regional network uh yeah between
some Arab countries and Israel anti-
missiles and the drones Network bringing
together The
Radars networks in several countries
this network was very active recently
and it bring a very rapid alert about
the Iranian attack to Israel but to move
forward
to a military alliance between Israel
and some Arab State I think it is
still too far for different reason the
war that Israeli continued in Gaza for
more than 6 months now second the lack
of confidence with the United State and
its leading role in the region and the
newa approachment between the regional
powers that was emerged in the last 3
four years especially between Saudi
Arabia and Iran Emirates Iran this will
make it difficult for those countries to
balance their stance but I think I'm
quite sure it is not easy to go for an
offensive military alliance between
Israel and those uh countries so what
precisely do you think it was that led
especially uh Jordan and and Saudi
Arabia to
intervene yeah I think from the
Jordanian perspective it was all about
defending the country's sovereignity in
in the one hand in the other hand Jordan
will not be happy to see Iran involved
deeply in this struggle because this
will POS a serious challenge for Jordan
Jordan and Iran maintain a very
problematic relationship especially in
the last few years based on the role of
the Iranian proxies in the Northern and
Eastern borders uh the smuggling of we
and drugs and some statement by Iraqi
militias and Iranian officials who who
threaten Jordan in a way or another that
why I think but that doesn't bring
Jordan in the same bases with Israel
because Jordan also consider what's
going on in Gaza and West Bank as an
existential threat for its M yeah uh
stability security national identity
this is really in the top of the
discussion in the public debate in
Jordan especially in the last seven
months Jordan fear from the forced
migration of Palestinian forced the
transfer of Palestinian Jordan is very
much feared from this statement by
Israeli far right politicians who
consider Jordan as Eastern Palestine and
consider Jordan is the Palestinian
State uh these are also an exist
existential threats for the country
Jordan is a trapped between if I may say
and I Cote here some officials between
two major treble makers uh in our area
Israel and tan yeah it's a it's a um
uncomfortable position to be in and what
sort of conversations do you expect to
be taking place behind closed doors in
the Arab world right now not only in
Jordan as Israel molds its options and
considers how to respond to Iran's
attack over the
weekend not to allow Netanyahu divert
the attention from Gaza to somewhere
else this is a top priority not allow
Netanyahu uh to force Palestinian to De
or to deport them especially from Gaza
to prevent by all means RAF battle that
is planned by the Israelis to avoid this
Regional turmoil and sliding to a
regional widespread War this is a
serious threat for those countries each
countries has its own calculus and they
want really to avoid such a horrible
scenario for the whole region nobody
will be a winning in such a widespread
confrontation on the regional level
therefore to calm down the situation is
the top priority now now and to pressure
Israel by American Allies and European
allies not to go far in their
retaliation because what we are quite
sure about it if Israel attack Iran
again because you should know that
Israel started this this conflict with
Iran by attacking the is Iranian Embassy
in Damascus if the Israeli also
retaliate to the Iranian attack the
Iranian will retaliate again and this
will be a vious of violence and I think
the countries in the middle which is
Arab countries mainly will pay a very
heavy price this is the top priority to
avoid such crazy scenario yeah um we
just have to uh be specific here Israel
has of course not claimed responsibility
for the attack on the Diplomatic
compound uh in in Syria that was or
aranta of the alud center for political
studies and Jordan thank you so much for
all those
insights thank
you and for some analysis I'd like to
welcome aido Steinberg with the German
Institute for international and security
Affairs we've just heard there in our
report this challenge for Arab countries
to stay on the side of the West even
when that means uh supporting Israel how
much do you think that this latest
Iranian attack has complicated The
Balancing
Act I I don't think that
ISL attack has complicated The Balancing
Act um simply because uh the Arab
Nations neighboring Israel uh have a lot
more problems with is with the Israeli
uh attacks in in Gaza with the Israeli
War in Gaza against Hamas then with an
is is with military action against Iran
they all do agree uh with Israel that
Iran is the greatest uh threat to
Regional security and that is part of
and that is part of the reason why
Jordan and Saudi Arabia and possibly the
United Arab Emirates cooperated with
Israel and the United States uh in
fending off this uh this Iranian attack
last weekend do we know the extent to
which they were involved in fending off
this latest Iranian
attack well they did play A Minor minor
role uh but it was uh important
especially we we have SE seen that
Jordan uh even even shut down some of
these some of the drones flying over
Jordanian territory the role of Saudi
Arabia might have been uh might have
been even more important because Saudi
Arabia opened up its airspace to
American and possibly even uh even
Israeli fighter jets um since
2022 some of these nations do have an
agreement with Israel and the United
States although partly unofficial about
air defense and that's uh and the reason
is very simple um Saudi Arabia the UAE
Jordan and even Egypt to some extent
they fear this growing strength um of uh
of the Iranian missile program so even
with that fear very much front and
present when you look at a figure like
say Jordan's uh King Abdullah you've
mentioned also the strong public support
within Jordan and these countries for
the plight of the Palestinians concerns
about what is happening in Gaza when you
look at Jordan how does he go about
maintaining these ties with Israel and
the West um while also uh putting at
ease the minds of the public about
what's happening in
Gaza yeah there is a major difference
between uh between Jordan and countries
like Saudi Arabia or the UAE although
the populations in all these countries
are adamantly on the side of the
Palestinians and partly on the side of
Hamas as well Saudi Arabia and the UAE
are stable countries in full control uh
of the situation in the country Jordan
always has to fear a major mobilization
of the Palestinian population uh in in
the Kingdom but I think that might be
one reason why this situ situation in
Jordan has improved a little bit after
the after the Iranian attacks simply
because uh fighting fighting against
Iran or at least positioning the the
kingdom against Iran has more support uh
in the in the country then siding with
uh with Israel although only implicitly
in its fight against Hamas so let's turn
to the big question about what an
Israeli response might look like
what would a best case scenario be for
the Arab countries or or a worst case in
terms of what Israel decides to
do I think uh that uh that some Arab
countries especially Saudi Arabia would
welcome a limited Iranian response they
all want um Iran to be reigned in uh if
not by the United States then by Israel
they all fear Iran Iran a lot more than
uh than than Israel at the same time
they are very much worried about
Regional escalation uh Saudi Arabia has
once been under attack of of Iranian
drones in
2019 and the then changed its re
Regional policies totally Saudi Arabia
has virtually tried to steer a
non-aligned force in in in the last two
years for the time being they would love
like uh they would like the response to
be of a kind that avoids a larger
Regional War but in the long run uh They
Are all uh extremely anti anti Iranian
and they are aware uh that Iran has to
be reigned in uh especially in its uh in
its Ambitions to become a nuclear power
well thank you so much for joining us
with your analysis today that is g
Steinberg from the German Institute for
international and security Affairs we
very much appreciate your
time thank you we want to talk more
about the role of Arab nations in this
conflict with Hans yakob Shindler he's a
former Diplomat and currently senior
director of the counter extremism
project which is a global policy Think
Tank welcome back to DW sir we just saw
in our report how countries like Jordan
Saudi Arabia and the UAE helped Israel
to fend off Iran attack on the weekend
how unexpected was
this thank you so much for having me
this is really a moment where Israel can
build a very strong Coalition against
Iran in the last couple of years what we
have seen is really Iran expanding its
influence via proxies throughout the
region isbah is much bigger than it used
to be the houthis are definitely far
more active than they used to be Iraq is
essentially having a problem with a
domination from tan Syria and the Assad
regime are in the hands really at the
behest of tan because together with the
Russians they help to save the country
and it has of course found a new found
Regional power Russia as its Ally so
Iran has really been able to position
itself in the region pushing back
against Western and Israeli support so
it is now a chance because a expanded
Iranian influence is not in the interest
of uh I neither one of the other Arab
states neither UAE nor Saudi Arabia or
Egypt or Jordan would like to see a
Middle East dominated by Iran so this is
really a chance um that Jordan really
defended uh itself and Israel wasn't all
that much of a surprise because Jordan
has the longest the second longest peace
treaty after Egypt with Israel the real
surprise uh was Saudi Arabia to a
certain extent but discreetly over the
last couple of months the whenever the
houthis tried to shoot rockets and
missiles not only at commercial shipping
but when it tried to shoot those into
Israel um Saudi Arabia has been very
helpful uh not only in providing radar
data but also shooting down some of
those ones right and you're saying
Israel is using the opportunity in your
the beginning of your answer to to build
a strong Coalition against Iran uh some
people are calling this a new Arab isra
AIS uh would you agree with this
description by some
observers I mean we're not quite yeah
that so there is a coalition to defend
against Iranian missiles already in
place um but what I'm saying is this is
a chance for Israel to build that
Coalition um but it will of course also
depend to a certain extent on what the
Israeli reaction is going to be I don't
think from an Israeli perspective there
is any other choice to respond but you
have seen the new nous War cabinet
meetings over hours and hours
deliberating what are the options what
can be done what would be an appropriate
response that to a certain extent we
establish this deterence uh that Iran is
not going to attack Israel now
continuously uh um in the next couple of
months but also doesn't exacerbate the
situation to the extent that we are
sliding into a regional war and as you
say everyone is waiting to see how
Israel exactly does respond do you think
these Arab Nations would help Israel
again if it were to strike back against
Iran and provoke another counter
Counterattack by
tyan I mean helping Israel in an
offensive operation I think this is a
lot to ask even the US government seems
to have made clear um that they are not
going to be supportive of an Israeli air
strike on Iran itself that doesn't
extend to Israeli air strikes on hisa
which is also a clear threat uh to
Israel already in motion because you
know more than 880,000 Israelis have not
been living in the North of Israel since
October and the Arsenal of hisbah is
very vast the time to uh warn Israelis
when isbah fires missile is much shorter
than it was from Iran and hisbah acts at
the beest of Iran so this is one of the
options and with this option I don't
think any of the Arab states would have
an issue and looking at what happened in
20 6 where Israel attacked hisbah in a
situation where hisbah had taken
hostages and killed them um and
diminished really its infrastructure in
Lebanon um Iran's reaction was simply
harsh words and then they rebuild hispa
afterwards but I would assume that if
the hisbah infrastructure especially its
missile Arsenal is significantly
degraded by Israel neither the Arab
states would have a problem with it nor
would Iran necessarily react to this and
of course if there's another air strike
of Iran on Israel I would assume that
the likelihood is very very high that
Arab states are going to again come to
the aid of Israel I just wanted to ask
you finally what you think this all
means for the future of Israel's war
against Hamas in
Gaza look we are now at a very complex
situation really it's three different
issues that isra has to sort out at the
same time of course primarily there is
still the issue that Hamas is in Gaza
and as soon as Israeli troops had
withdrawn from Kanan Yunis Hamas
operatives uh were there immediately
afterwards trying to you know put their
version of Law and Order again in place
so Hamas is not defeated in Gaza at this
point this needs to be done Hamas cannot
be allowed after a PO light terror
attack to survive as a terror concern
in the Gaza Strip not in the in of
Israel but not in the interest of
everyone else I just remind everyone we
did arrest Hamas terrorists at the end
of the year here in Germany and in the
Netherlands that try to attack Germany
and European targets um second problem
of course is the ongoing shooting war
with isbah partially on the beest of
Iran partially on its own beest this is
a real threat to to Israel on a daily
basis and the third is the Strategic
threat that Iran poses so not only the
threat of an Iranian aerial attack again
at the proportions that we have seen
down the line at the next opportunity
that they get but also they looming
their looming nuclear program that was
Hans yakob Shindler with a counter
extremism project thank you very much
for your insights and your time we
really appreciate
it thank you so
muchad co-authored postrevolutionary
Iran a political handbook it's also dean
of the College of Arts sciences and
education at Missouri University of
Science and Technology welcome to DW I'd
like to pick up on a couple of thoughts
you tweeted recently about this conflict
you said Iran's unexpectedly forceful
attack shows the limits of American
deterence so two things to pick out of
that was this attack unexpected or
forceful given that Iran telegraphed the
attack in advance and used drones that
took hours to arrive and two the limits
of American deterence is an interesting
idea I'd like you to expand on so let's
start with the unexpectedness of Iran's
attack sure so my sense is that you know
uh when the Israelis attacked the
Iranian Consulate in in Syria it was a
provocative act perhaps you know
intended to lure Iran into you know an
attack of this sort because you know
they realize that the Iranians need to
save face code UN code and and I think
you know what we saw was uh it in a way
a daring but rather ineffective attack
by by the Iranians that was uh
communicated to to the neighboring
Estates you know turkey and others that
passed along the information and of
course you know the amount of hours that
it needed for those drones and missiles
to reach the Israelis enable them to be
able to uh do do a great job of
protecting themselves and shooting down
you know Iran's incoming uh drones and
missiles uh so I think you know the
Iranians felt obligated you know for for
domestic reasons perhaps but also as a
way of showing you know reestablishing
their deterrence engage in this logic
and perhaps now so forceful but
ineffective let's pick up on the other
part of that tweet then the the the
limits of American
deterence right so president uh Biden uh
famously told the Iranians don't right
don't attack but that wasn't sufficient
uh to deter the Iranians from attacking
uh you know Israel for the reasons I
mentioned that they felt they had to do
this thing that it also shows that you
know a a state like Israel really still
does need the deterrent factor of the
United States to be able to both protect
itself and deal with some of its Nemesis
in the
region in your series of tweets you also
said that unless significantly
challenged Iran's influence in Middle
Eastern Affairs has escalated so tell us
why and whether you think this might be
something that Israel will factor into
its
response so I think you know Iran is
viewed uh by many states in the Middle
East as a rather intimidating neighbor
right due to its size its you know
military powers and and and so forth but
it's also a state that doesn't really
have reliable friends uh if you notice
the type of uh actors that came and
defended Iran's attack on Israel where
the likes of Syria you know the Taliban
and Iran's own proxy groups uh and it
seems that almost everybody else uh was
basically upset U intimidated by this
thing and worried about the outcomes for
example as you were reporting in the in
your uh report right now uh you the
Jordan Ian and and the Saudis have very
good reasons a you know in terms of
violation of their sovereignty and Aeros
space Etc but also because they they
realize that they want to be on the good
sides of the United States and Israel in
the long term a and just deal contain a
threat such as Iran as as a neighboring
state okay so we have this forceful but
effective but ineffective attack
launched by Iran against Israel as you
would see and we have an Iran
undeterred by the fact that America is
standing behind Israel's shoulder so
we're in this this this game of bluff
and Double Bluff now where Israel says
what do I do next where Iran has said if
you do that we will slap you down so who
calls who Bluff
next right my my sense is that the same
type of logic that perhaps forced the
Iranians to Launch the attack on Israel
is now forcing the Netanyahu government
to a stand tall you know because you
know for for a prime minister who is
also uh you know under a lot of uh uh
you know criticism domestically in
Israel for the handling of the Gaza War
etc etc you know he feels like you know
he cannot be the Prime Minister that
does not respond to Iran's attack with
with the uh you know returning the punch
however the question and and I think
that's going to happen but the really
the the main question at this point in
my view is what would Iran do next
certainly the Iranians are not you know
capable of militarily standing up to
Israel or prevents you know at attack
but it doesn't mean that they are out of
milit non-military options okay for
example what if Iran really raises the
anti by walking out of npt the
nonproliferation treaty
okay options beyond the me military
we'll leave it there that's very
interesting mad buedi co-author of
post-revolutionary Iran a political
handbook thank you so
much thanks for